 

INTRODUCTION

To THE

ORATIO DE HARUSPIOUM RESPONSIS.

Tm: following is from Wolf:

A certain noise had been heard in the parts near Rome, which were
called the Ager Latiniensis or Latinensis, the Senate consulted the
Haruspices, who answered somewhat as follows:

“Postulat-iones (postiliones) esse Jovi, Saturno, Neptuno, Telluri,
diis caelestibus3 expianda autem delicta esse hujusmodi :

“ I. Ludos minus diligenter factos pollutosque

“ II. Loca sacra et religiosa profana haberi,

“ III. Oratores contra jus fasque interfectos

“ IV. Fidem et jusjurandum neglectum,

“ V. Sacrificia vetusta occultaque minus diligenter facta pollutaque.
Monere iqitur deos.- Ne per optimatium discordiam dissensionemque
Patribus principibusque caedes periculaque creentur, auxilioque de-
minuti deficiantur; qua re ad unum imperium provinciae redeant,
exercitusque pulsus deminutioque accedat: ne occultis consiliis res-
publica laedatur: ne deterioribus repulsisque honos augeatur: ne
reipublicae status commutetur ” (see c. 19, and the varieties there).

P. Clodius Pulcher, aedilis in ΒΩ. 56, took occasion, when these
Responsa were delivered by the Haruspices, to apply to Cicero’s house
what they had said about sacred places being polluted, this house
having been consecrated by Clodius and afterwards restored to Cicero.
The orator replied either at that time or at some time to this attack,
and he again defended the case of his house, in such way that while he
repelled the charges of Clodius, he made the answcrs of the Haruspices
apply to him. As to the Ludi which had been polluted, he said, these
could only be the Megalenses, which had lately been celebrated to the
great danger of the citizens, owing to a number of slaves having been
allowed to enter the Cavea, though free men only were accustomed to
have admission to the exhibition. With respect to the Loci Sacri, he

